---
layout: doc
title: Npgsql 6.0 Release Notes
---
The release candidate of Npgsql version 6.0 has been released and is available on nuget.

Npgsql 6.0 brings some major breaking changes and is not a simple in-place upgrade. Carefully read the breaking change notes below and upgrade with care.

## New features

The full list of issues for this release is [available here](https://github.com/npgsql/efcore.pg/milestone/24?closed=1).

### Multiple hosts, load balancing and failover

Npgsql now includes first-class support for managing connections to multiple PostgreSQL servers, unlocking both load balancing for better performance and failover for better reliability ([#732](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/732)). This long-awaited feature is an important part of using PostgreSQL in scalable and mission-critical environments.

For example, consider the following connection string:

```connection_string
Host=server1,server2,server3,server4,server5;Username=test;Password=test;Load Balance Hosts=true;Target Session Attributes=prefer-standby
```

This will make Npgsql load balance connections across 5 different servers, in round-robbin fashion; connections to read-only standby servers is preferred in order to offload as much read-only load from the primary server, but if only the primary server is up it will still be used.

The multiple hosts feature is highly configurable, [see the full documentation for more details](/doc/failover-and-load-balancing.html).

### Timestamp rationalization and improvements

Support for `timestamp with time zone` and `timestamp without time zone` has been rationalized and simplified, and aligned with PostgreSQL best practices. In particular, the "UTC everywhere" pattern is much better supported via the PostgreSQL `timestamp with time zone` type, which is the recommended way to handle timestamps.

* UTC timestamps have been cleanly separated from non-UTC timestamps, aligning with the PostgreSQL types. The former are represented by `timestamp with time zone` and DateTime with Kind UTC, the latter by `timestamp without time zone` and DateTime with Kind Local or Unspecified. It is recommended to use UTC timestamps where possible.
* Npgsql no longer performs any implicit timezone conversions when reading or writing any timestamp value - the value in the database is what you get, and the machine timezone no longer plays any role when reading/writing values.
* Npgsql no longer supports date/time representations which cannot be fully round-tripped to the database. If it can't be fully stored as-is, you can't write it.
* A compatibility switch enables opting out of the new behavior, to maintain backwards compatibility.

This change introduces significant breaking changes (see below), although a compatibility flag can be used to opt out and revert to the previous behavior.

Other date/time improvements include:

* Support for the new [.NET DateOnly and TimeOnly types](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/date-time-and-time-zone-enhancements-in-net-6/) ([#3616](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3616)).
* PostgreSQL `daterange` is now mapped to NodaTime [DateInterval](https://nodatime.org/3.0.x/api/NodaTime.DateInterval.html) ([#3973](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3973)).

### Raw SQL mode and new batching API

It is now possible to use PostgreSQL positional parameters, allowing Npgsql to skip rewriting your SQL and send it directly to PostgreSQL ([#1042](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/1042)):

```sql
SELECT * FROM blogs WHERE b.name = @p; -- Before Npgsql 6.0
SELECT * FROM blogs WHERE b.name = $1; -- Npgsql 6.0
```

This is more efficient, is safer (since Npgsql doesn't have to parse SQL), and aligns your SQL with the actual PostgreSQL SQL. Note that named parameters are still supported for backwards compatibility.

In addition, Npgsql now supports [the new ADO.NET batching API](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/28633) introduced in .NET 6.0 as an alternative to packing multiple statements into a single NpgsqlCommand, delimited by semicolons ([#3860](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/pull/3860)):

```c#
// Before Npgsql 6.0
var command = new NpgsqlCommand("SELECT 1; SELECT 2", connection);
var reader = await command.ExecuteReaderAsync();

// Npgsql 6.0
var batch = new NpgsqlBatch(connection)
{
    BatchCommands = { new("SELECT 1"), new("SELECT 2") }
};
var reader = await batch.ExecuteReaderAsync();
```

As with positional parameters, this allow Npgsql to avoid parsing and splitting your SQL which is safer and more efficient.

To learn more about positional parameters and batching, [see this blog post](https://www.roji.org/parameters-batching-and-sql-rewriting).

### Other new features

* Full support for the upcoming PostgreSQL [multirange type](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/rangetypes.html), mapped to arrays of `NpgsqlRange<T>` ([#3868](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3868)).
* PostgreSQL `decimal` can now be mapped to .NET [BigInteger](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.numerics.biginteger) ([#3665](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3665)).
* Bulk import/export now includes a fully asynchronous API ([#3309](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3309)).
* Improved array nullability via [a new connection string parameter](/doc/connection-string-parameters.html#misc) ([#3386](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3386)).
* Composite types and records can now be read by getting a nested DbDataReader through `NpgsqlDataReader.GetData()` ([#3558](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3558), thanks [@Emill](https://github.com/Emill)). This allows for efficient access without having to map composite types to .NET POCOs.
* Considerable work has gone in to make Npgsql more friendly to trimming/AOT, removing reflection ([#3300](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3300)). Npgsql still isn't fully trimming-friendly, but it's getting close.

## Breaking changes

### Major changes to timestamp mapping

> [!NOTE]
> It is possible to opt out of these changes to maintain backwards compatibility, see below.

#### Quick summary

* Most applications want to store UTC timestamps in the database. To do this, migrate your `timestamp without time zone` columns to `timestamp with time zone` ([see migration notes below](#migrating-columns-from-timestamp-to-timestamptz)), and always use DateTime with Kind=Utc when interacting with Npgsql.
* For the few cases where non-UTC timestamps are desired, add explicit configuration to your properties to be `timestamp without time zone`

#### Detailed notes

The below notes will use the PostgreSQL aliases `timestamptz` to refer to `timestamp with time zone`, and `timestamp` to refer to `timestamp without time zone`. Note that `timestamp with time zone` represents a UTC timestamp and does **not** store a timezone in the database.

* UTC DateTime is now strictly mapped to `timestamptz`, while Local/Unspecified DateTime is now strictly mapped to `timestamp`.
  * DateTime with Kind=UTC are now written as PostgreSQL `timestamptz`; previously, DateTime was always written as `timestamp`.
  * It is no longer possible to write UTC DateTime as `timestamp`, or Local/Unspecified DateTime as `timestamptz`. This was previously allowed, with Npgsql performing implicit timezone conversions.
  * Note that if you write a UTC DateTime to a PostgreSQL `timestamp` column, PostgreSQL will implicitly convert the `timestamptz` value sent by Npgsql, performing a timezone conversion based on the `TimeZone` parameter.
* `timestamptz` values are now read back as DateTime with Kind=UTC, without any conversions; these were previously returned as local DateTime, converted to the local machine's timezone. When reading `timestamptz` values as [DateTimeOffset](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.datetimeoffset), UTC values (offset 0) are always returned.
* It is no longer possible to write [DateTimeOffset](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.datetimeoffset) with offsets other than 0 (UTC), since these cannot be represented in PostgreSQL. These were previously implicitly converted to UTC before sending.
* It is no longer possible to read or write `timetz` as DateTime or TimeSpan, as these don't have a timezone. This was previously allowed, with the offset being stripped.

See the [EF Core provider docs](/efcore/release-notes/6.0.html) for additional changes at the EF level.

#### NodaTime changes

* [Instant](https://nodatime.org/3.0.x/api/NodaTime.Instant.html) is now sent as a `timestamptz` value, and not as a `timestamp`, since they represent a universally agreed-upon point in time. To send a `timestamp`, use [LocalDateTime](https://nodatime.org/3.0.x/api/NodaTime.LocalDateTime.html).
* When reading `timestamptz` as [ZonedDateTime](https://nodatime.org/3.0.x/api/NodaTime.ZonedDateTime.html) or [OffsetDateTime](https://nodatime.org/3.0.x/api/NodaTime.OffsetDateTime.html), UTC values are always returned. Previously, local values based on the PostgreSQL `TimeZone` parameter were returned.

> [!NOTE]
> In most cases, storing UTC timestamps is the recommended practice. If this is what you're doing, it's strongly recommended to migrate all relevant columns from `timestamp` columns to `timestamptz`. See below for how to do this.

#### Migrating columns from timestamp to timestamptz

Migrating `timestamp` columns to `timestamptz` is a simple procedure, but care must be taken, depending on the current contents of your column.

As a starting point, let's assume your existing `timestamp` column has the timestamp `2020-01-01 12:00:00`:

```sql
SELECT "created_on", pg_typeof("created_on") AS type FROM "Blogs";
```

Results in:

```output
      created_on     |            type
---------------------+-----------------------------
 2020-01-01 12:00:00 | timestamp without time zone
```

The following SQL will change the column's type to `timestamptz`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE blogs ALTER COLUMN created_on TYPE timestamp with time zone;
```

When converting the `timestamp without time zone` column to `timestamp with time zone`, PostgreSQL will assume that existing values are local timestamps, and will convert them to UTC based on the `TimeZone` parameter. Performing the above query will result in something like:

```output
        CreatedOn       |           type
------------------------+--------------------------
 2020-01-01 12:00:00+02 | timestamp with time zone
```

This means that your new `timestamptz` column now contains 10:00 UTC, which is probably not what you want: if the original values were in fact UTC values, you need them to be preserved as-is, changing only the column type. To do this, set `TimeZone` to `UTC` before executing the `ALTER TABLE`:

```sql
SET TimeZone='UTC';
ALTER TABLE blogs ALTER COLUMN created_on TYPE timestamp with time zone;
```

This will ensure that no time zone conversions will be applied when converting the columns:

```output
        CreatedOn       |           type
------------------------+--------------------------
 2020-01-01 14:00:00+02 | timestamp with time zone
```

#### Opting out of the new timestamp mapping logic

The changes described above are far-reaching, and may break applications in various ways. You can upgrade to version 6.0 but opt out of the new mapping by enabling the `Npgsql.EnableLegacyTimestampBehavior` [AppContext switch](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.appcontext?view=net-5.0). To do this and revert to the legacy timestamp behavior, add the following at the start of your application, before any Npgsql operations are invoked:

```c#
AppContext.SetSwitch("Npgsql.EnableLegacyTimestampBehavior", true);
```

### Parameter names now use case-sensitive matching

Parameter names used to be case-insensitive:

```c#
using var command = new NpgsqlCommand("SELECT @foo", connection);
command.Parameters.AddWithValue("FOO", 8);
```

For performance reasons, matching is now case-sensitive, so parameter names must exactly match ([#4027](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/4027)).

To revert to the legacy case-insensitive behavior, add the following at the start of your application, before any Npgsql operations are invoked:

```c#
AppContext.SetSwitch("Npgsql.EnableLegacyCaseInsensitiveDbParameters", true);
```

### NodaTime: daterange is mapped to DateInterval by default

When using NodaTime, reading a PostgreSQL `daterange` returns [DateInterval](https://nodatime.org/3.0.x/api/NodaTime.DateInterval.html) instead of `NpgsqlRange<LocalDateTime>` ([#3973](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3973)). It is still possible to read the latter by invoking `reader.GetFieldValue<NpgsqlRange<LocalDateTime>>`.

### The provider-specific date/time types have been obsoleted

Npgsql contains provider-specific `NpgsqlDateTime`, `NpgsqlDate` and `NpgsqlTimeSpan` types, which were designed to provider the same APIs as the corresponding built-in BCL types, but to support the full range of the PostgreSQL types. These types were buggy and inefficient in many ways, and have been obsoleted; they will be removed in Npgsql 7.0.

Instead of the obsoleted types, use the following techniques:

* NodaTime can be used to interact with values which are out-of-range for the BCL types.
* To support values which are out-of-range for NodaTime, PostgreSQL timestamps can now be read/written as long, and dates can be read/written as int. These are the raw PostgreSQL representations, with no operations - they simply provide an "escape hatch" in case users need to interact with out-of-range values.
* For interval, a new `NpgsqlInterval` type has been introduced, which again contains the raw PostgreSQL data (months, days, time).

### Npgsql.LegacyPostgis has been removed

The Npgsql.LegacyPostgis plugin, which mapped legacy Npgsql types to PostGIS, has been removed and no longer ships ([#3962](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/issues/3962)). Use [Npgsql.NetTopologySuite](/efcore/mapping/nts.html) to work with PostGIS.
