# Npgsql 7.0 Release Notes

Npgsql version 7.0 has been released and is available on nuget.

## New features

The full list of issues for this release is [available here](https://github.com/npgsql/npgsql/milestone/71?closed=1).

### DbDataSource

A major improvement in Npgsql 7.0 is <xref:Npgsql.NpgsqlDataSource>, which implements the new [DbDataSource](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.data.common.dbdatasource?view=net-7.0) abstraction in .NET System.Data. A data source represents your PostgreSQL database, and can hand out connections to it or support direct execution of SQL to it.

Instead of directly instantiating an `NpgsqlConnection` and then executing commands against it, you now create a data source once, and then use that throughout your application:

```csharp
await using var dataSource = NpgsqlDataSource.Create(connectionString);

// Execute a command directly against the data source, no NpgsqlConnection needed:
await using var command = dataSource.CreateCommand("INSERT INTO some_table (some_field) VALUES (8)");
await command.ExecuteNonQueryAsync();

// Open a connection in order to e.g. start a transaction on it:
await using var connection = await dataSource.OpenConnectionAsync();
```

Since the data source encapsulates all the necessary configuration for connecting to a database (e.g. the connection string, authentication callbacks...), it can registered in dependency injection or passed around as needed, without needing any additional information. The new <xref:Npgsql.NpgsqlDataSourceBuilder> also  provides the ideal API point for various configuration when building a data source:

```csharp
var dataSourceBuilder = new NpgsqlDataSourceBuilder("Host=localhost;Username=test;Password=test");
dataSourceBuilder
    .UseLoggerFactory(loggerFactory) // Configure logging
    .UseNodaTime() // Use NodaTime for date/time types
    .UsePeriodicPasswordProvider(); // Automatically rotate the password periodically
await using var dataSource = dataSourceBuilder.Build();
```

### Improved logging with Microsoft.Extensions.Logging

Previous versions had a custom logging implementation which required special adapters and was hard to use. Npgsql 7.0 fully supports the standard .NET [Microsoft.Extensions.Logging](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/extensions/logging) - just provide Npgsql with your `ILoggerFactory` and you're ready to go.

If you using ASP.NET, things are even easier with the new [Npgsql.DependencyInjection](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Npgsql.DependencyInjection), which takes care of seamlessly picking up the ASP.NET logging configuration from DI:

```csharp
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);
builder.Logging.AddConsole();
builder.Services.AddNpgsqlDataSource("Host=localhost;Username=test;Password=test");
```

For more details, see the updated [logging documentation page](../diagnostics/logging.md).

## Breaking changes

### <a name="commandtype_storedprocedure" />CommandType.StoredProcedure now invokes procedures instead of functions

When [`NpgsqlCommand.CommandType`](https://www.npgsql.org/doc/api/Npgsql.NpgsqlCommand.html#Npgsql_NpgsqlCommand_CommandType) is set to [`CommandType.StoredProcedure`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.data.commandtype#system-data-commandtype-storedprocedure), Npgsql now generates SQL for invoking a PostgreSQL [stored procedure](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createprocedure.html), and not a [function](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createfunction.html), as before. To opt out of this breaking change and continue to invoke functions as before, enable the `Npgsql.EnableStoredProcedureCompatMode` [AppContext switch](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.appcontext) as follows:

```c#
AppContext.SetSwitch("Npgsql.EnableStoredProcedureCompatMode", true);
```

For context, PostgreSQL originally only supported functions, and did not support the standard SQL concept of stored procedures; because of this, [`CommandType.StoredProcedure`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.data.commandtype#system-data-commandtype-storedprocedure) was implemented to invoke functions. PostgreSQL 11 then introduced stored procedures, which have various advantages over functions in some scenarios (e.g. the ability to use transactions). The 7.0 release changes [`CommandType.StoredProcedure`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.data.commandtype#system-data-commandtype-storedprocedure) to invoke procedures as its naming suggests, and aligns Npgsql with other database providers for better compatibility.

Note that with Npgsql, there is no advantage in using [`CommandType.StoredProcedure`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.data.commandtype#system-data-commandtype-storedprocedure) over simply invoking your function or procedure via SQL. Doing so is in fact recommended:

```c#
// Invoke a procedure
using var command1 = new NpgsqlCommand("CALL some_procedure($1, $2)", connection)
{
    // Add parameters
};

// Invoke a function
using var command2 = new NpgsqlCommand("SELECT * FROM some_function($1, $2)", connection)
{
    // Add parameters
};
```

### <a name="commandtype_storedprocedure" />Managing type mappings at the connection level is no longer supported

Previous versions of Npgsql allowed mapping custom types (enums/composites) and configuring plugins (NetTopologySuite, NodaTime) at the connection level; the type mapping change would persist only for the lifetime of the connection, and would be reverted when the connection closed. This mechanism was inefficient - connections get opened and closed a lot - and added significant maintenance burden internally.

With the introduction of `NpgsqlDataSource`, Npgsql now has a natural API point for managing type mappings:

```c#
var dataSourceBuilder = new NpgsqlDataSourceBuilder("Host=localhost;Username=test;Password=test");
dataSourceBuilder.MapEnum<MyEnum>();
dataSourceBuilder.UseNodaTime();
await using var dataSource = dataSourceBuilder.Build();
```

All connections handed out by the data source will use the configured type mappings.

Note that managing type mappings globally via `NpgsqlConnection.GlobalTypeMapper` is supported as before, but has been marked as obsolete; although we do not plan on removing global type mappings any time soon, <xref:Npgsql.NpgsqlDataSourceBuilder> is now the recommended way to manage type mappings.
